.TH GROFF_FILENAMES 7 "27 June 2013" "Groff Version 1.22.2"
.SH NAME
groff_filenames \- filename extensions for RUNOFF, roff and groff
.
.\" The .SH was moved to this place in order to appease `apropos'.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Legalese
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.de authors
This file was written by Bernd Warken
.MT groff-bernd.warken-72@web.de
.ME .
..
.
.
.de copying
Copyright \(co 2013
.RS
.ft CI
Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.ft R
.RE
.
.
.P
Last update: 5 May 2013
.
.
.P
This file is part of
.ft CI
groff\\fR, a free software project.
.
.P
You can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the
.nh
.ft CI
GNU General Public License
.ft R
.hy
as published by the
.nh
.ft CI
Free Software Foundation (FSF)\\fR,
.hy
either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.
.P
You should have received a copy of the
.nh
.ft CI
GNU General Public License
.ft R
.hy
along with
.ft CI
groff\\fR,
see the files
.nh
.ft CB
COPYING
.ft R
and
.ft CB
LICENSE
.ft R
.hy
in the top directory of the
.ft CI
groff
.ft R
source package.
.
.P
You can also visit
.UR http://\\:www.gnu.org/\\:licenses
.UE .
..
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Setup
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.ds1 Ellipsis "\&.\|.\|.\&"
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Macro definitions
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" .FONT (<font name> <text> [<font name> <text> ...])
.\"
.\" Print in different fonts: R, I, B, CR, CI, CB
.\"
.de1 FONT
.  if (\\n[.$] = 0) \{\
.	nop \&\f[]\&
.	return
.  \}
.  ds result \&
.  while (\\n[.$] >= 2) \{\
.	as result \,\f[\\$1]\\$2\f[]
.	shift 2
.  \}
.  if (\\n[.$] = 1) .as result \,\f[\\$1]
.  nh
.  nop \\*[result]\&
.  hy
..
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" End of macro definitions
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
Since the evolution of
.FONT CI RUNOFF
in the 1960s and
.FONT CI roff
in the 1970s, a whole bunch of filename extensions for
.FONT CI RUNOFF
and
.FONT CI roff
files were used.
.
.
.P
The
.FONT CI roff
extensions refer to preprocessors or macro packages.
.
These extensions are fixed in all
.FONT CI Unix R \-like
operating systems.
.
.
.P
Later on,
.FONT CR groff
added some more extensions.
.
We will now write a
.I man\-page about these filename extensions.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH HISTORICAL RUNOFF LANGUAGE
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
The first text language that used the
.FONT CB .COMMAND
structure for defining commands is said to be the
.FONT CI MEMO
language with programs
.FONT CB MODIFY
and
.FONT CB DITTO R .
.
It was used at
.FONT CR MIT
under the operating system
.FONT CR CTSS
in the years 1960\-63.
.
But there is no open documentation for this old text system, but it
seems that there is 1 book about it in the non-public library at
.FONT CB MIT R .
.
.
.P
The letter
.FONT CB m
taken from
.FONT CI MEMO R / MODIFY
is still active as the option
.FONT CB -m
for declaring a macro package in
.FONT CB troff R / CB nroff R .
.
.
.P
The first documented
.FONT CB .COMMAND
text language was
.FONT CI RUNOFF R ,
see
.BR runoff (7).
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS RUNOFF Files
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
All available
.FONT CI RUNOFF
files are now kept in the internet at an archive on
.FONT CI github R .
.
Use the command-line call
.RS
.EX
.FONT CR "$ " CB "git clone git@github.com:RUNOFF/RUNOFF.git"
.EE
.RE
for getting this archive (without the leading dollar).
.
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .RUNOFF
.TQ
.FONT I <name> CB .runoff
were the oldest naming for files in the original
.FONT CI RUNOFF
format of the 1960s at
.FONT CR "IBM 7090"
and
.FONT CR 7094
with the operating system
.FONT CR CTSS R .
.
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .RUN
.TQ
.FONT I <name> CB .run
This abbreviation was used for
.FONT CI RUNOFF
files on the
.FONT CR CTSS
and
.FONT CR Multics
operating system in the 1960s and later on.
.
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .RNO
.TQ
.FONT I <name> CB .rno
was used for normal
.FONT CI RUNOFF
text files, mostly on the
.FONT CR "PDP10\-10 archive" R .
.
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .RNH
.TQ
.FONT I <name> CB .rnh
was used for help files written in the
.FONT CI RUNOFF
language on the
.FONT CR "PDP10\-10 archive" R .
.
.
.P
.FONT CI RUNOFF
files with the extensions
.FONT CB .rnh R ,
.FONT CB .rno R ,
and
.FONT CB .run
are still available in the internet at several sites, mostly at the
.FONT CR "DEC PDP\-10 archive" R .
.
See
.nh
.UR http://\:pdp\-10.trailing\-edge.com/\:cgi-bin/\:searchbyname?name=*.rnh
RNH
.UE ,
.UR http://\:pdp\-10.trailing\-edge.com/\:cgi-bin/\:searchbyname?name=*.rno
RNO
.UE ,
and
.UR http://\:pdp\-10.trailing\-edge.com/\:cgi-bin/\:searchbyname?name=*.run
RUN
.UE  .
.hy
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Processed RUNOFF Text Files
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
Files written in the
.FONT CI RUNOFF
language were processed by the program
.FONT CB RUNOFF R .
.
Only text files were produced by this step, because graphics was not
available in the 1960s.
.
Today we would use the file name extension
.FONT CI * CB .txt R .
.
That was not done in these early times.
.
Instead the following extensions were taken:
.
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .DOC
.TQ
.FONT I <name> CB .doc
Very often this naming was used for the output of the
.FONT CB RUNOFF
program.
.
It contained
.I filled
and
.I hyphenated
text, suitable for tty mode.
.
The extension
.FONT CB .doc
was later on taken by
.FONT CR Microsoft
for their
.IR "office files" .
.
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .MEM
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .mem
This often used extension was taken for
.FONT CI RUNOFF
files to refer to the ancient
.FONT CI MEMO
language.
.
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .HLP
.TQ
.FONT I <name> CB .hlp
The formatting of
.FONT CI * CB .rnh
files (help files) was stored under this extension.
.
.
.P
This ends the description of
.FONT CI RUNOFF .R .
.
All following parts of this document refer to the
.FONT CI roff
language and the used file name extensions thereof.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH COMPRESSION OF ROFF FILES
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
Each
.FONT CI roff
file can be optionally
.IR compressed .
.
That means that the
.I total filename
ends with a
.IR "compressor name" .
.
So the whole filename has the structure
.IR <name> \f[CB].\fP <extension>[ \f[CB].\fP <compression>] .
.
.
.P
Mostly known are the
.I compressor extensions
.FONT CB .Z R ,
.FONT CB .gz R ,
and
.FONT CB .bzip2 R .
.
Relatively new is
.FONT CB .xz R .
.
.
.P
From now on, we will ignore the
.I compressions
and only comment the structure
.IB <name> . <extension>\fR.\fP
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH MAN\-PAGES
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
The
.FONT CR Unix
.FONT CI "manual pages"
are shortly named
.FONT CI "man\-pages" R .
.
The
.FONT CI man\-page
style is the best known part of the
.FONT CI roff
language.
.
.
.P
The extensions for
.FONT CI man
should be better documented.
.
So this is documented here.
.
.
.P
Files written in the
.FONT CI man
language use the following extension:
.IB * . <section>[<group>] .
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Man-page Sections
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
The traditional
.FONT I "man\-page " CI <section>
is a digit from
.FONT CB 1
to
.FONT CB 8 R .
.
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .1
.TQ
.FONT I <name> CB .2
.TQ
.FONT I <name> CB .3
.TQ
.FONT I <name> CB .4
.TQ
.FONT I <name> CB .5
.TQ
.FONT I <name> CB .6
.TQ
.FONT I <name> CB .7
.TQ
.FONT I <name> CB .8
Classic man\-page
.IR sections .
.
.
.P
Linux added the section number
.FONT CB 9
for kernel man\-pages.
.
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .9
.I Linux
kernel man-pages
.
.
.P
In older commercial
.FONT CI Unix
systems, the 3 characters
.FONT CB l R ,
.FONT CB n R ,
and
.FONT CB o
were also used as
.I section
names.
.
This is today
.IR deprecated ,
but there are still documents in this format.
.
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .l
.TQ
.FONT I <name> CB .n
.TQ
.FONT I <name> CB .o
.I Deprecated
old
.IR "man\-page sections" .
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Man\-page Group Extensions
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
The
.I <group>
extension in
.FONT CB . I <section>[<group>]
is optional, but it can be any string of word characters.
.
Usually programmers use a group name that is already used, e.g.
.FONT CB x
for
.FONT CI "X Window System"
documents or
.FONT CB tk
to refer to the
.FONT CI tk
programming language.
.
.
.P
Examples:
.
.
.TP
.FONT CB groff.1
is the man-page for
.FONT CB groff
in
.I section
.FONT CB 1
without a
.I group
.
.
.TP
.FONT CB xargs.1posix.gz
is the man\-page for the program
.FONT CB xargs
in
.I section
.FONT CB 1
and
.I group
.FONT CB posix R ;
moreover it is
.I compressed
with
.FONT CB gz
.FONT R ( CB gzip R ).
.
.
.TP
.FONT CB config.5ssl
.FONT CI "OpenSSL CONF"
library configuration files from
.I section
.FONT CB 5
with
.I group
.FONT CB ssl R .
.
.
.TP
.FONT CB dpkg-reconfigure.8cdebconf
man\-page for the program
.FONT CB dpkg\-reconfigure
in
.I section
.FONT CB 8
and
.I group
.FONT CB cdebconf R .
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Source of Man\-pages
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
There are 2
.FONT CI roff
languages for writing man\-pages:
.FONT CB man
and
.FONT CB mdoc R .
.
.
.P
The names of these 2 styles are taken as
.I extensions
for the source code files of man\-pages in the
.FONT CI groff
package.
.
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .man
.I traditional
Unix\-like man\-page format.
.
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .mdoc
additional BSD man-page format.
.
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .mandoc
Files using this extension recognize both man\-page formats in
.FONT CB groff
and other processors.
.
.
.TP
FONT I <name> CB .n
A temporary man-page file produced by a run of
.B make
in the
.CB groff
source package.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH TRADITIONAL TROFF EXTENSIONS
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Files Using Macro Packages
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
The
.FONT CI "classical roff"
languages were interpreted by the
.FONT CB "traditional troff"
and
.FONT CB "nroff"
programs.
.
.
.P
There were several
.FONT CI roff
languages, each represented by a
.IR "macro-package" .
.
Each of these provided a suitable file name
.IR extension :
.
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .me
.FONT CI roff
file using the
.FONT CB me
.IR "macro package" .
.
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .mm
.FONT CI roff
file using the
.FONT CB mm
.I macro package
.
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .ms
.FONT CI roff
file using the
.FONT CB ms
.I macro package
.
.
.P
All of these classical
.FONT CI roff
languages and their extensions are still very active in
.BR groff .
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Source Code for Macro Packages (TMAC Files)
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
In traditional
.FONT CI roff
the source code for the macro packages was stored in
.FONT CI TMAC
files.
.
Their file names have the form:
.
.
.TP
.FONT CB tmac. I <package> R ,
.I <package>
is the name of the macro package without the leading
.FONT CB m
character, wich is reintegrated by the option
.FONT CB -m R .
.
.
.P
For example,
.FONT CB tmac.an
is the source for the
.FONT CB man
macro package.
.
.
.P
In the
.FONT CB groff
source, more suitable file names were integrated, see later on.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Preprocessors
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
Moreover, the following
.I preprocessors
were used as filename extension:
.
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .chem
for the integration of chemical formulas
.
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .eqn
for the mathematical use of equations
.
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .pic
graphical tool
.
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .tbl
for tables with
.FONT CI tbl
.
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .ref
for files using the
.FONT CB prefer
.I preprocesor
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Classical Roff Files
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .t
.TQ
.FONT I <name> CB .tr
for files using the
.FONT CI roff
language of any kind
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH NEW GROFF EXTENSIONS
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.FONT CI "GNU roff"
.FONT CB groff
is the actual
.FONT CI roff
standard, both for classical
.FONT CI roff
and new extensions..
.
So even the used new extensions in the source code should be regarded
as actual standard.
.
The following extensions are used instead of classical
.FONT CB .t
or
.FONT CB .tr R :
.
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .groff
.TQ
.FONT I <name> CB .roff
general ending for files using the
.FONT CI groff
.I language
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Source Code for Macro Packages (TMAC Files)
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
As the classical form
.FONT CB tmac. I <package_without_m> R ,
of the
.FONT CI TMAC
file names is quite strange,
.
CI groff
added the following structures:
.
.
.TP
.FONT I <package_without_m> CB .tmac
.TQ
.FONT CB m I <package> CB .tmac
.TQ
.FONT CB groff_m I <package> CB .tmac
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Files Using new Macro Packages
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.FONT CI Groff
uses the following new macro packages:
.
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .mmse
file with swedish
.FONT CB mm
.I makros
for
.B groff
.
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .mom
files written in the
.FONT CI "groff macro package"
.FONT CB mom
.
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .www
files written in
.FONT CB HTML R \-like
.FONT CI groff
.IR macros .
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Preprocessors and Postprocessors
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .hbtbl
a new
.FONT CI tbl
format.
.
See
.BR groff_hdtbl (7).
.
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .grap
files written for the graphical
.FONT CB grap
processor.
.
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .grn
for including
.BR gremlin (1),
pictures, see
.BR grn (1).
.
.
.TP
.FONT I <name> CB .pdfroff
transform this file with
.FONT CB pdfroff
of the
.FONT CI groff
system
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.
.TP
History and future
.BR runoff (7),
.BR roff (7),
.BR man\-pages (7),
.BR groff_diff (7),
.BR groff (7)
.
.
.TP
.I Compression
.BR uncompress (1posix),
.BR gzip2 (1),
.BR bzip2 (1),
.BR xz (1)
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "AUTHORS"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.authors
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "COPYING"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.copying
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Emacs settings
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
